Adding a New Test-Case
======================

Create a new directory (or place it into an already existing
directory)

Maybe you want to start by copying the contents of _template_ to your
new directory.

Write your client and server programs; you can have as many servers as
you like (or no server at all).

The servers are started in the order given in the test-configuration
file and they have to write the string "SERVER READY" to standard
error just after completing startup. If they output any IOR to
standard error, this IOR will be passed on to the next server/client
on the command line (-i <IOR>). A server should terminate after its
standard input is closed; if it doesn't it will be killed and the test
fails. You don't have to care about these details if you use the
omnitest library (inherit from OmniServerApp and call server_object to
register your server object with the naming server) or use one of the
OMNI_SIMPLE_SERVER macros (see omnitest.h).

A client has to do all the error checking for a test and has to
terminate within the specified timeout. A test is considered as failed
if the client doesn't terminate on its own, dumps core, exits with a
non-zeo return code, or if any of the servers doesn't terminate after
its standard input is closed.

Finally, you have to write a makefile (dir.mk) and a
test-configuration file (TEST_CONFIG, have a look at
_template_/TEST_CONFIG for the file format) so the test-controller
knows how to build and start your tests.
